Hello and welcome back
to the course on Deep Learning.
Today we're talking about energy-based models.
And this topic is one that is not really necessary
for you to be able to apply Boltzmann machines,
so we could've just completely not talked about
energy-based models and you would've been totally fine.
You would've been able to understand them
on an intuitive level and also to apply them in practice.
But at the same time,
if you're going to delve into the space of Deep Learning
and specifically the more advanced things
like Boltzmann machines,
you're inevitably going to come across
the term energy-based models.
And we wanted to make sure you're comfortable with it.
And plus it will give you that extra level of understanding,
or extra level of intuitive understanding
of where things are coming from,
and what exactly, how exactly,
to think about the Boltzmann machines
and these stochastic processes that describe systems.
So, let's have a look.
Here we've got an equation,
and by the way, have you wondered
why it's called the Boltzmann machine?
Well the reason is because of this equation.
This is the Boltzmann distribution.
It comes from physics,
and it is used in the sampling distribution
for the Boltzmann machine.
You know how the Boltzmann machine constantly
creates these different states of our system?
Well in a very rough description,
it's using the Boltzmann distribution
as part of that process.
And the Boltzmann distribution talks about probability.
So, on the left we have a probability,
and I know this formula look a bit complex right now,
but as we go through it, you'll see that it is very simple.
And then we'll look at an example
of how that actually works in real life.
So we've got a probability here,
and this is the probability
of a certain state of your system.
So, we're describing the different states of our system,
i is a state.
This is the probability of your system
being in state i.
And probability of your system being in state i
is equal to e, as an exponent,
to the power of minus energy of that system,
divided by k, T.
K is constant and T is the temperature of your system.
And then divided by the sum of all of those values,
for all of the possible states of the system.
So, it's a pretty straight-forward formula
when you think about it.
The important thing here to see is that
e is to the power of minus energy,
meaning the higher the energy of a certain state,
the lower the probability.
So, probability is proportional,
is inversely related with energy.
And so, we're kind of like assuming that the temperature,
we're looking at the system at a given temperature,
and this is for thermodynamics,
so, in a thermodynamical system, so, for instance a gas,
or it could be any kind of system right,
it could be a macro system,
like a gas in a bottle or in a room.
It could be a micro system,
it could be just some molecules together,
or just one molecule.
But in any case, the probability of your system
being in a certain state is inversely related
to the energy of your system in that state.
Alright, and so, let's have a look at an example
to explain this bit better.
Let's say we have a room,
and this is probably one of my favorite examples,
and you've probably even heard
of this example back in high school.
Here we've got a room,
and here we have let's same some people,
and we have a gas, for instance air.
So, have you ever thought of why the gas
is distributed across the whole room?
Why is the gas, for instance, not all in one corner?
Cause' that could technically,
there's nothing preventing that happening, right?
The molecules of gas,
there's nothing saying they have to be there,
they have to be all over the room.
They could be anywhere.
They're moving around and statistically,
they could end up here, this could happen,
in any room, at any given point in time,
this is an example of a possible state of this system,
all the molecules,
for instance in the room you're sitting in right now,
they could decide to go all into one corner,
or statistically they could end up in that corner.
But what the Boltzmann distribution is saying
that the probability of that state occurring is very low,
because the energy in that state would be very high.
Because the molecules are very close to each other,
they would be bumping, they would be making a lot of chaos
and havoc, and they would be moving very quickly.
To be in that state, they would have to have a huge energy.
Given the same temperature of the room,
temperature hasn't changed,
but the molecules would have to have a lot of energy,
if they were gonna be in that state.
And the probability is very low, and so,
basically it's a translation into the language of statistics
saying that, hey this could happen, probability is tiny,
and what we normally observe is this,
because this is the lowest energy state for that system.
When the molecules are like equally spaced apart,
they're just moving around,
yes they're bumping occasionally,
but there's no,
if there were an even lower state of the system possible,
then the system would eventually,
would in the highest likelihood, end up in that state.
But this is already the lowest
energy state for the system possible,
and therefore that's what it is.
And that's why, for instance,
we can move around and breathe
and enjoy our lives as we are,
without having to worry about situations like this.
So, there we go, that's a quick example
of the Boltzmann distribution in real life,
and it applies to everything.
For instance, if you dropped some ink into water,
it will start spreading evenly in all directions.
It won't form a star for instance.
It could form a star, or a snowflake, but it's not going to
because that's not the lowest energy state.
On the other hand, if you drop,
if you put a drop of oil into water,
then it won't start spreading,
it will turn into a little ball on the surface of the water,
because that is the lowest energy state
for that specific system.
And it happens everywhere through life.
And Boltzmann machines are constructed
with a similar concept in mind.
So, energy is defined in Boltzmann machines
through the weights of synapses,
and then, once the system is trained up,
once the weights are set, then what happens,
is the system, based on those weights,
will always try to find the lowest energy state for itself.
It has lots of different options, just like a gas in a room,
it has lots of different options.
It can be in this state, it can be in that state,
but the weights will dictate what is the lowest
energy state for the system,
and it will constantly try to get
to the lowest energy state possible.
That's how it works, and that's why they're called
energy-based models.
And here's an example of an energy function
for a restricted Boltzmann machine.
We haven't talked about them yet,
but we'll discuss them in the upcoming tutorial.
Here I just wanted to point out that,
what it would look like, so a bit different to the case
of the Boltzmann distribution energy,
because it's not a gas.
But at the same time,
you can see that it is defined through the weight.
So, a, v are biases in the system, so just constants,
v and h are, that's the visible node that you're looking at,
specifically you're calculating your equation,
h is the hidden node that you're calculating.
That's your visible node again, that's your hidden node,
and that's the weight between the
visible and the hidden node.
And so, as you can see, well your biases are fixed
and your weights are fixed here.
And then the system knows that
its energy function will be determined in this way.
And then the probability of being in a certain state
is given by, through the energy,
just like in the Boltzmann distribution.
Whereas zed, is the sum of all of the,
of all of these values, for all of the possible states,
just like in the Boltzmann distribution.
And so, from that, we know that the probability
of being in a certain state is
inversely related with the energy of that state.
And the system also knows that,
so it's going to play by those rules,
it's going to find the lowest energy state,
just because of the way we set it up.
So, that's a very high level
overview of energy-based models,
and why they're called Boltzmann machines,
why this specific model is called a Boltzmann machine.
And how energy plays in the work, in the functioning of a
Boltzmann machine, it's very different.
This concept is very different
to what we had in just neural networks.
And if you'd like to learn more, there's a great article,
or it is a great paper actually not an article,
by Yann LeCun, from 2006.
It's called A Tutorial on Energy-Based Learning,
and it's very long.
I think it's like 50 pages long or something.
So if you really want to dig into
energy-based learning and energy-based models
then this is probably the best place to start.
If you don't have time to read an article,
to read a paper, and you'd just like to get a bit more
of a good feel for all of these things,
all of these things like entropy and, you know...
This concept of energy and entropy
and Boltzmann distribution,
they actually are very closely tied
to how we live our lives.
For instance, why does time travel forwards
and not backwards?
And you know, why if you mix two liquids together,
if you mix two liquids together
you can't then un-mix them?
Why smoke goes out of a cigarette not back into a cigarette.
Why you can remember the past
and you can't remember the future.
These kind of very philosophical questions,
we're getting very close to that
when we're talking about energy-based models
and things like entropy,
even though we didn't really
mention entropy throughout this tutorial.
But if you'd like to get into a bit more of that
without having to read a paper and understand mathematics
and all of these things that govern that,
there's a great movie that I can recommend you.
It's called Mr. Nobody, by Jaco Van Dormael,
created in 2009.
It's got Jared Leto, great movie,
on all of these things.
On entropy, on how time travels forwards
and things like that.
It was premiered at the
66th Venice International Film Festival.
So, if you're looking for a good movie,
I would highly recommend checking this one out.
Other than that, that's our energy-based models,
and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then, enjoy deep learning.